4: THE BLOODY HAND, OR, THE FATAL CUP. A TALE OF HORROR!
24 pp. London: Kemmish and Son, n.d.

The Bloody Hand is a first-person narrative ostensibly by
the son of an Irish family that earlier emigrated to France.
Reginald O'Mara (a pseudonym, he says) was born in 1766 to
a French mother, Antoinette Beaufois, daughter of a Marquis.
O'Mara has been promised to the Catholic church in expiation
for indiscretions committed by his maternal grandfather.
(The grandfather was in his youth professedly a Catholic but
really a deist who belonged to a sect called the Illuminati.
He and his friends carried off from a convent a girl whom he
wished to marry and who had been cloistered against her
will. In the course of the rescue he cut off a priest's
hand; the girl, who was taking communion when her chance

for escape occurred, inadvertently ran off with the chalice.
They were both punished severely and after his release from
prison were permitted to marry on condition that the church
be given half their property and their eldest son. The nar-
rator's mother was their only child, so O'Mara is the first
available sacrifice.) O'Mara manages to avoid his ecclesi-
astical obligations but is more than once put into the Bas-
tille for political and quasi-political reasons, having be-
come conspicuous for his essays on the rights of the people.
The priest whose hand was cut off by O'Mara's grandfather

is still intent upon vengeance but at last dies a bizarre
death: a prisoner whom he is poisoning spits the poison back
into his eye and kills him. Finally O'Mara manages to leave
France and go to England, which he says is much nicer.