## Introduction

In many ways, what I have done here is constructed my own text, which approximates the Gothic. It consists, primarily, of 71 pie charts-- though some additional charts will be added as I delve into the most interesting points.

I have been working intimately with an invaluable bibliographic work by Ann Tracy, The Gothic Novel 1790-1830: Plot Summaries and Index to Motifs. In it, Tracy provides detailed information on the content of 208 novels; for this project, I restrict myself to a consideration of her index. Tracy's 'motifs' are broad plot elements, images, and character types, encompassing, for example, both "relative, lost, discovery of" and "shipwreck." The index has 208 entries, but many include a multiplicity of sub-categories of increasing specificity-- "pulp, bloody," for example, offers entries for "formerly abbess," "formerly baby," and "formerly devotees of Juggernaut." My study, for now, is concerned with the 71 main-level motifs which appear in at least 20 of the 197 novels whose authors' genders are known.

This method, as a necessary trade-off, must elide all the potentially interesting differences between the various lost relatives and shipwrecks it examines. At first glance, this seems to leave out most of the work of the novels in question. However, as my study will show, the wide range of motifs themselves begin to recapture some of the variance in style that we might expect. Moreover, by seeking out traditional categories of the Gothic via a radically different method, it becomes possible to ask-- and answer-- new questions about those categories.

The particular category which I am interested in today is gender. Discussions of gendered Gothics have lately moved away from the early feminist readings which defined the Female Gothic straightforwardly as works “written and consistently read by women” (Fleenor 7); gender, now, often lies not in an embodied author, but in a text. Robert Miles, for example, defines male and female Gothics by their relation to the act of seeing and being seen-- the male gothic tending toward a “problematics of sight,” the female toward a "problematics of the sublime" (Gothic Writing 47)-- so that questions about gender are answered by ever-closer readings of the interrelationship of the works of Ann Radcliffe and Matthew Lewis, each of which is seen to adopt male and female Gothic elements.

However, by digging so deeply into such a small number of novels, thousands of Gothic texts have been overlooked, each of which has contributed, for its readers, some small part of those readers' experience of the boundaries of the genre as a whole. One could, of course, read William Godwin and Mary Shelley, and Charlotte Dacre and Francis Lathom, and Clara Reeve and Charles Maturin, to build an ever-more complex picture. However, if we wish to examine gender on a scale commensurate with that at which the Gothic was consumed during its initial proliferation, we rapidly reach a point at which, as Franco Moretti has often noted, "[r]eading ‘more’ seems hardly to be the solution" (55).

Hence, my approach here. For each 'motif' identified by Tracy as appearing in a large enough number of works to be worths examining in further detail, I have calculated how often it has been deployed by men versus women. The question is thus framed, not as, "what do men usually write about?" but rather, "what motifs, if any, serve as useful predictors for an author's gender?". Rather than proceeding directly to the task of defining a framing which does not attempt to define pre-determined categories, but rather places its emphasis on potential points of difference, and which therefore makes its first task proving the existence of that difference.

## Future Research

The obvious element being overlooked here is, of course, context. It is entirely likely that, for example, the perfect parity regarding dueling is in fact a false negative. There may still be distinctly gendered trends in who duels whom, or why, or what kind of death toll the duels entail. This method can't detect any of that. As I move forward with this project, over what will likely be the next *several* years, [I will incorporate full texts]. In the mean time, I am confident that there are no false positives here -- these particular elements of the horror-gothic really are distinctly male, and neither the genre distionctions nor the gendered distinctions that we typically draw are a perfect binary.