## Works Referenced

####Jones, Stephanie. *Exploring Gothic Fiction: A Corpus-Based Approach*. MSc Evolution of Language and Cognition. The University of Edinburgh. 2010. http://hdl.handle.net/1842/5351
* "This dissertation will use the quantitative and qualitative tools of corpus linguistics to analyse a corpus of Gothic Fiction from the nineteenth century with the purpose of describing the genre in terms of its use of language and seeing how the results correlate with themes that have emerged through more traditional literary analyses." (5)
* "According to McEnery et al., and supported by Sinclair, corpus linguistics can be defined as “a collection of (1) machine readable (2) authentic texts (including transcripts of spoken data) which is (3) sampled to be (4) representative of a particular language or language variety” (McEnery et al. 2006, pp.5, Sinclair 2004)." (15)
* only ELEVEN (!) texts, and NO RADCLIFFE!!! (16) --> so apparently I can claim to be doing 'corpus linguistics' even if I only work with the tiny, tiny fraction of canon texts that I have human-corrected OCR of.
* "Within the different time periods the texts were selected randomly" (17) -- ??? -- From what list? How were they randomized?? I DON'T BELIEVE YOU.
* **WordSmith Tools 5.0 (Scott 2008)**: keyword analysis, frequency analysis, concordance lines and extracts (probably only useful with clean OCR), collocations and clusters
* "The ideal size of a reference corpus is at least five times the size of the smaller corpus (Berber-Sardinia 2000)" - but BNC seems problematic for being too contemporary? Maybe use something from ECCO?
* Noticed a lot of pronouns and vocatives, but this might just be because they're comparing novels to non-novel texts? Body parts sounds like a solid observation, though!
* concordance lines are REALLY cool
* "If the words that describe the themes or the feelings elicited from the reading of the texts are used fairly infrequently, how is it that these themes and feelings are so easily associated with the genre of Gothic fiction? This can partially be explained through the high frequency of the words seemed and looked of which the tenth most frequent cluster is looked as if." (33) - Hmmm. Mostly on board, I suppose. "This helps to associate seemed and looked as if with the Gothic elements of the novels so that even when the Gothic words are not present, the association remains." (33)


...

####O’Halloran, Kieran (2007). Corpus-assisted literary evaluation. Corpora, 2(1) pp. 33–63.
* Fleur Adcock’s poem, Street Song, is evaluated by the stylistician, Roger Fowler, as ‘dynamic and disturbing’. I agree with his literary evaluation. These unsettling effects take place in initial response to the poem... before  proper reflection and analysis of the poem and individual interpretation of it. Implicit within Fowler’s evaluation is that this is likely to apply for readers generally. The purpose of this article is to show how empirical corpus evidence can usefully provide substantiation of such initial evaluations of literary works, showing whether or not they are likely to be stereotypically experienced by readers. In drawing on both schema theory and corpus analysis to achieve this, the article makes links between cognitive stylistic and corpus stylistic foci. 

...

####Potter, Franz. *The History of Gothic Publishing, 1800-1835: Exhuming the Trade*.
* **Literary Rubbish**. "To better understand and contextualise the history of the trade Gothic we must challenge certain assumptions about the canon-making process" (1).
    - **The Critical Divide**. "Popular" gothics generally considered as not part of the genre, possibly even the cause of its decline (2). Two schools: "historically enclosed genre" vs "more comprehensive and continual diffusion of discourses" (4). Recycling is "essential to the life of the genre; it is a sign of activity rather than stagnation" (8).
    - **Commercial readers**. Books kept circulating long after being written (9). Reading figures are a better indicator of importance/popularity.
    - **The subliterary industry**. "the Gothic bluebook industry was itself a large secondary market for the Gothic and not merely a passive inheritor of Gothic subjects and styles from legitimate novels" (10).
    - **Periodicals and terror**. "recycling... crosses the neat division between 'art' and 'trade' or 'genre' and 'trash'" (11).
    - **The business of morality: Authors and money**. Authors' mentions of their own commercial motivations are taken by critics as admissions that their works have no literary merit (12). ('Morality' is about judging the books, rather than societal moral concerns.)
* **The Circulating Library**. Libraries ostensibly meant to dispense information (14), but were they really filled with dangerous Gothic books?
	- **The circulating library**. Minerva Press more than 1/3 Gothic (15). The catalogue: "the catalogues reveal that more than three quarters of the average library's stock was non-fiction" (16) but a 1797 pamphlet actually suggests that it was 80% fiction (17). **(???)** Library organization: employed assistants/librarians, but not many. Stock advertised several thousand books, but "it was common practice to exaggerate the size of stock, mostly in anticipation of future business" (19) [or by listing books twice under varying titles (29)]. Price: subscriptions too expensive for working-class families (19); prices rose with the price of books; non-subscribers could borrow by the night or by the volume. Rules and regulations: various policies similar to modern libraries, but "negligence was widespread" (21).
	- **Gothic fiction in the circulating library**. Despite "drastic variation in the total number of Gothic novels versus total fiction produced" (24), comparing "the total fiction and Gothic novel holdings of ten circulating libraries" shows "continued and sustained interest in Gothic fiction" (24). "One argument, perhaps, is that it was the retention of pre-1800 Gothic novels which sustained the Gothic novel; however," in those 10 libraries, large percentages of the novels are post-1800 (25-6). Interestingly, "no single novel appeared in all circulating libraries surveyed" (27). **Survey includes 342 Gothic novels** (27). Many 'classic' Gothics had "scant availability", especially compared to 'trade' authors (27-8). Long discussion of Fish's library as exemplary; "Clearly by 1810, the emphasis of the Gothic had shifted from the terror narratives to those of unrestrained horror" (30); "Gothic fiction is a commodity... The more books with lurid titles, the more money he was likely to make" (31).
	- **The readers**. Some catalogs of individual subscribers. Averil Sibel read a lot of domestic novels, but some Gothic; "she preferred historical, didactic, and domestic tales with Gothic settings" (33). (Potter makes an *extremely* weird assumption that she is younger than her husband.) Mrs. Thurtell, whose son had been dramatically executed for murder, "developed a certain fondness for sensational fiction" (34); her reading list "conspicuously connects the criminal acts of her sons with the sensibilities of her social class" (35). Notable for preferring horror and for preferring female protagonists (35). Both readers read a variety of novels, not limited by class, gender, or genre (36); interestingly, they read very few 'classics' -- Walpole and Austen, but not Scott or Radcliffe (36). **"circulating libraries and their readers did construct a different 'canon' than what is suggested by literary history"** (36).
* **Literary Mushrooms: The Gothic Bluebook**. Represented as "the vulgarisation of the already pastiche-ridden Gothic genre" (37), but is this accurate?
	- **A disreputable literary history**. Critics display an "underlying confidence that bluebooks are all plagiarisms" despite the fact that "ascertaining a precise Gothic source... is, in effect, impossible, for characters and situations in the genre are traditionally clichéd" (40). Bluebooks assumed to lack both originality and 'legitimacy'. Distinction also extends to legitimate and illegitimate readers (41).
	- **Assessing the evidence**. Are they really "aesthetically corrupt" (42)? -- This seems like a weird question to ask, and certainly not the question *I* am interested in. The conflation of aesthetics with morality is weird/indefensible.
	- **The 'disposable rubbish' trade**. "The Gothic bluebook trade... was separate and distinct from street literature, the cheap ballad sheets, pamphlets and chapbooks" (43). Instead, sold by publishers who were "book dealers... separate from both 'respectable' and 'street' publishers" (44). Three phases in bluebook publication: serialisation 1802-1805; sudden rise 1809-1812; decline after 1820 (47). Bluebook figures generally differ from novel figures - novel high points were 1805, 1810, and 1819 (47) (but I don't see those high points for the novel at ALL). "dramatic variations in bluebook production as compared to a more consistent, though declining novel industry" (48). **692 items in this study, 342 novels and 350 bluebooks** -- I want them all!! (Also, seriously, Potter, WHY IS THIS ON PAGE 48?!) "During the 1820s the number of bluebooks claiming to be original were also on the decline and the number of abridgments and redactions increased" (50). "A sudden increase in bluebook titles in 1820 was the direct result of two new inventions" (51), i.e., cheap paper and the steam-powered printing press (?). Rather than seeing the waning of the bluebook as a decline of interest in the Gothic, Potter sees "more objective causes" (51), i.e., technologically-spurred increases in magazines, serials, and newspapers as Gothic outlets. Potter argues that bluebook authors, rather than being "anonymous manufacturers" "driven by profiteer publishers" were actually in a "close-knit community" in which publishers "collaborated" with authors; press recognized Wilkinson as an author of 'original' works, valued her as an individual author (52). 69% of bluebooks were anonymous, but it seems to be mostly female authors (52). 69% is closer to the 79% of all fiction which was unsigned, in contrast to Gothic novels, which "readily acknowledged the author" (52). Conclusion: bluebook trade should be seen as independent of novel trade (53).
	- **The fetishisation and moralisation of the formulaic**. "What instances exist of deviation and variation, to say nothing of innovation, in bluebooks?" (54) - my research question! "As in most bluebooks, **there are no inexplicable mysteries**" (55) - interesting!! Then the process of explaining can't just be about legitimizing the existence of the supernatural, because these books never sought legitimacy. Why?? -- Wilkinson prefers a "'measured' use of the supernatural, presented as a series of sensational and highly artificial situations" (60). ... Bluebooks don't simply abridge individual novels, but remix them and adapt non-novel sources (55-6). "Wilkinson's redaction reveals a polite moralistic subtext which Frederick Frank, for instance, locates exclusively in novels" (62). Close-reads other bluebooks that augment or alter their sources in interesting ways.
	- **Perverted tastes and vulgar readers**. Legitimate vs. illegitimate readers. Chapter ultimately argues that bluebooks were read by middle-class readers, not "the 'vulgar' working class" (76), though I'd like to challenge the idea that there's something *wrong* with a genre being popular with the working class. Page 71 - prices of borrowing books and bluebooks. "The appeal of the bluebook's short tale of terror was perhaps... a quick succession of terror and horror" (71) - ? "There are some textual clues that point that... bluebooks attracted the middle-class reader," mainly complicated sentences and latinate diction (71). **"the readers of Gothic bluebooks were expected to be familiar with a wide range of poetry"** (72) - esp. Shakespeare, Aaron Hill's drama, and Edward Young's Graveyard poetry. **"There are of course many examples of original poetry found in the bluebooks"** (74) - !!! Not "of course" at all!! - *Tomb of Aurora*.
* **Ghosts, Spectres and Phantoms: Recycling the Gothic in Periodicals and Anthologies**. "The persistence of the Gothic tale in periodicals and collections, particularly tales after 1820, indicates a sustained readership and raises several questions; most importantly, how prevalent were tales of terror in periodicals and collections? Who was reading these tales?" (78)
    - **Definitions and boundaries: a compendium of prodigies**. Two kinds of short stories: tales vs. fragments (79); tale is longer. Mayo articles that periodical Gothics, unlike bluebooks, were sufficiently respectable for a middle-class audience (79).
    - **The incubi of a morbid imaginations: Morality and the periodical Gothic**. Three distinct phases of periodicalization (84): 1, 1825, 16 periodicals only 7 bluebooks (due to printing tech and bluebook decline); 2, 1830, 8 tales 1 bluebook; 3, 1833, 5 tales no bluebooks. (He keeps using "phase" where I would probably use "spike".) Assumptions about periodical gothics: bloodcurdling, but did not violate decorum (84). Dual plots, horrific and moralistic (84, also in bluebooks 74). Gothic stories continued on in Annuals (87), largely as historical tales (88).
    - **Plundering the Germans**. Circulating libraries also had collections of tales (89). "Framing narratives and other formal paratexts are frequently utilised to maintain editorial and authorial control of the narrative" (90) - draws attention to modes of (re-)transmission over supernatural elements (legitimizing strategy?). 54 (18%) of the novels claim to be German (92).
    - **The appetite for tales of terror**. "Scott did not 'kill off the Gothic" but instead, the Gothic "re-appropriated Scott's historical realism to reclaim the old Gothic" (95). Gothic tales (having been legitimized by their paratexts...?) made up 80% of the Gothic 1800-1834 (95), and 90% after 1820 (96). Tales rose dramatically as other forms declined (96).
* **Morality and Blood: William Child Green**. Green one of the few active Gothic novelists in 1826 - motivated by "pious didacticism" instead of money (97). Wrote a response to Melmoth in which protagnist's soul is saved (98), with the plot of The Monk (99). Suggestion that he uses Gothic forms to entice readers who would reject more 'serious' works (98) - like Caleb Williams? Green rewrites a lot of details, especially the appearance of evil (105). "Green flagrantly utilises familiar motifs and scenes from the high Gothic, but it was the way in which he recycles those motifs which makes his work unexpected" (108).
* **The Romance of Real Life: Sarah Wilkinson**. Wilkinson "lived by the pen" but without "the comfort of literary or economic success" (110). Wrote PRODIGIOUSLY, but never made quite enough, nor did her other sources of income work out; several applications to the Royal Literary Fund (113-4). Wilkinson "construct[s] clear and simple story lines free from dense subplotting" and "blend[s] the pleasing aesthetics and the enticing suspicion of terror found in Radcliffe and the rapidity of horrifying shocks distinctive of Lewis" (116) - Radcliffean noble, unsuperstitious characters in Lewsisite settings. In addition to original works (?), lots of adaptations - includes original titles/authors (119). Critical scorn for her attempts at novels - believed bluebooks should not be used to make novels (only the reverse!), and assumed the novels were plagiarized (120). Central Wilkinson motifs: rejected wives (120); secret, arranged, or forced marriages (121); women's culpability in seduction (125); "the confinement of distressed females" (127); conflicting kinship duties (128).
* **The Business of Morality: Francis Lathom**. "Lathom was, without a doubt, one of the most popular trade novelists of the early nineteenth century, only to be almost completely forgotten today" (131). Wrote to suit public taste, but wanted stories to be "fundamentally moral" (132). Success was not just popular and financial, but also critical (132). FASCINATINGLY suggestive history, that he left his wife and his OWN father rewrote his will so he'd only inherit if he never had contact with his own kids - why?? But I agree with Potter that 'he was totally gaaay' shouldn't NECESSARILY be the default assumption. (but I WANT TO BELIEVE!) Two phases of Lathom's writing: early moral stories influenced by Norwich drama (see: Midnight Bell, from Walpole's Mysterious Mother) (135), and later... historical novels? (142) Shift from morality to history based on "shifting readership" (144). **"There is no mistake in categorising Green, Wilkinson, and Lathom as hacks. All unashamedly wrote novels for profit, Green to redeem, Wilkinson for survival, and Lathom for professional pleasure. They demonstrate that there was a lively Gothic trade sustained, in part, through authors whose commercial prowess continued to attract readers."**
* **The Monster of Morality: Mary Shelley.**. "the reader's perception of morality, which is secondary to the modes of reasoning in the novel, is brought to the foreground in the adaptations" (145). "infusion of moral drama... repackage[d] the tale... heightening its popularity" (145). Contemporary critics frustrated by lack of clear moral (146). Potter calls Frankie "a brutal tale of the consequences of impious actions" (146)???? "inhumanity drives [the creature] to confront his creator" (147)? - sure, *other people's* inhumanity! 1823 theatre adaptation introduced a blatant moral ('man was not meant to usurp god!!') and silenced the creature (147). 1826, a short story mediated both (148). "Mary Shelley, while interested in instilling a moral, is more subtle in her inculcation of 'conduct, manners, or morality" (150) - DISAGREE STRONGLY that Shelley has a moral!! Agree that in Frankie, "morality is placed secondary to science and the modes of reasoning" (150). The adapted tale "demonstrates the power of the trade Gothic to disseminate and perpetuate a tale. ...it illustrates how **the novel, the bluebook, and the magazine industries were inexorably linked** - novel to chapbook, drama to novel, tales of terror to novel. ...if we are to fully understand the Gothic we have to view the good novels with the awful, the 'art' and the 'trade'." (151).

...


#### Schmidt, Benjamin N. "Words Alone: Dismantling Topic Models in the Humanities." *Journal of Digital Humanities* 2.1 Winter 2012.
* "[Topic modeling] does a good job giving an overview of the contents of large textual collections; it can provide some intriguing new artifacts to study; and it even holds, as I will show below, some promise for structuring non-lexical data like geographic points."
* "This article suggests two ways to bring words back to topic models in humanistic practice, which destabilizes some of the assumptions that make topic models so appealing. The first, using geographical data, shows the problems with labeling topics based on the top five to ten words and the ways that assumptions of meaningfulness and coherence are not grounded. The second shows the dangers of accepting a topic model’s assumption of topic stability across different sorts of documents: extremely common practices, such as plotting topic frequencies across time, can elide dramatic differences in what words different documents actually use. In both cases, visualization that uses the individual word assignments, not just the topic labels, can help dramatically change the readings that humanists give to topics."
* look into k-means and k-nearest-neighbour clustering?
* "The top ten lists give an extremely impoverished summary of the topics. ...Individual ports where ships spend the most time can dominate a topic, as in topic 7, but the real clusters driving coherence are only visible across the interactions of all the low level points."
* "The algorithm is obviously combining two very different clusters together; whaling from Hawaii, and the eastern seaboard-England shipping route. Plotted geographically, this is obviously incorrect. But the obviousness is completely dependent on the ability to visualize the entire model at once."
* "Further diagnostics with MALLET might have caught the error, since researchers in information retrieval do know that chimera topics like this frequently occur. (David Mimno et al. recently published a paper showing algorithmic ways to find topics like these.) Currently, most humanists are not using sophisticated diagnostics packages on their topic models. The quality of insights they will be able to derive from topic models are directly related to errors like these."
* "Andrew Goldstone and Ted Underwood recently wrote ... that the individual topic is too small a unit for analysis — “interpreters really need to survey a topic model as a whole, instead of considering single topics in isolation.” They argue we need to look at networks of interconnection through an entire model, because individual topics cannot stand in for discrete objects on their own."
* "line charts of topics raise the problem of stability" really interesting charts of change in frequency within topic over time. "This suggests that in addition to understanding topic models through their descriptions, humanists should also trace the ways words drift among topics."
* "Finally, sharing research that is grounded in individual words ensures that digital humanists do not spend too much time refining arcane practices for topic interpretation that connect only tangentially to live questions. Most humanistic scholars have spent their lives interpreting words; they have a special claim to make for expertise in interpreting them. Topic models are no less ambiguous, no less fickle, and no less arbitrary than words. They require major feats of interpretation; even understanding the output of one particular model is a task which requires considerable effort. And ultimately, topics are not what we are actually interested in. Words — despite not being coherent wholes or stable constants — are. Whatever uses humanists find for topic models, in the end they must integrate the models with a close understanding of the constituent words; and only by returning to describe changes in words can they create meaning."

#### Stubbs, M. 2005. ‘Conrad in the computer: examples of quantitative stylistic methods’, Language and Literature, 14 (1), pp. 5-24.
A stylistic analysis of Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness is used to illustrate the literary value of simple quantitative text and corpus data. Cultural and literary aspects of the book are briefly discussed. It is then shown that data on the frequencies and distributions of individual words and recurrent phraseology can not only provide a more detailed descriptive basis for widely accepted literary interpretations of the book, but also identify significant linguistic features which literary critics seem not to have noticed. The argument provides a response to scepticism of quantitative stylistics from both linguists and literary critics.
    
### References to pursue
* Rictor Norton's *Gothic Readings: The First Wave*
* O’Halloran: Corpus Stylistics as a way of overcoming arbitrariness and circularity.
    - O’Halloran, K. 2007a. ‘Corpus-assisted literary evaluation’, Corpora 2 (1), pp. 33-63.
    - O’Halloran, K. 2007b. ‘The subconscious in James Joyce’s ‘Eveline’: a corpus stylistic analysis that chews on the ‘Fish hook’, Language and Literature, 16 (3), pp. 227-244.
* Mahlberg, M. 2007. ‘Clusters, key clusters, and local textual functions in Dickens’, Corpora 2 (1), pp. 1-31. - She has created a corpus of twenty-three texts by Charles Dickens as well as an additional corpus of nineteenth century fiction. From these she finds the key 5- word clusters and determines five types that are important to the Dickensian literature relative to the more general nineteenth century corpus
* Michael Stubbs (2005, 2007)
    - Stubbs, M. 2007. ‘The Turn of the Linguists: Text, Analysis, Interpretation’ Pre-publication. Available online from http://www.unitrier.de/fileadmin/fb2/ANG/Linguistik/Stubbs/stubbs-2008-james-tots.pdf.
* Wynne, M. 2005. ‘Stylistics: corpus approaches’, Oxford University.: A reference corpus is used for a comparison with the corpus in question to see in what ways the smaller more specialized corpus deviates giving a picture of the more specialized language used
* Sinclair (2004): designing a corpus, the importance of choosing texts representative of the population of which language is being studied (in Wynne, above)
* Hogle, J.E. 2002. ‘Introduction’ in Hogle, J.E (Ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Gothic Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. - used for a timeline of the Gothic
* Berber-Sardinia, T. 2000. ‘Comparing corpora with Wordsmith Tools: How large must the reference corpus be?’, Proceedings of the workshop on Comparing Corpora 9, pp. 7-13.
* McEnery, T., R. Xiao, and Y. Tono. 2006. Corpus-Based Language Studies. London and New York: Routledge.
* Sinclair, J. 2005. ‘Corpus and Text — Basic Principles’ in Wynne, M (Ed.). 2005. Developing Linguistic Corpora: a Guide to Good Practice. Oxford: Oxbow Books. Available online from http://ahds.ac.uk/linguistic-corpora/


### Topic Modeling Notes
#### Works Read
[Topic Modeling and Network Analysis](http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?p=221) by Scott Weingart.
* Explains LSA and LDA.
* Gives examples of topic models from networks, and networks from topic models.

[LSA is a marvellous tool, but literary historians may want to customize it for their own discipline.](http://tedunderwood.com/2011/10/16/lsa-is-a-marvellous-tool-but-humanists-may-no-use-it-the-way-computer-scientists-do/) by Ted Underwood.
* Value of LSA is not its ability to identify synonyms (which is what information retrieval (i.e., mom) uses it for)
* avoid SVD because it compresses the matrix too much/in the wrong way, to find transitive kinds of association. --> highlights semantic relationships at the cost of slightly blurring other kinds of association
* if you’re interested in “topics” that are strictly semantic, you might want to use an algorithm that reduces dimensionality with SVD. If you’re interested in discourses, sociolects, genres, or types of diction, you might use LSA without dimensionality reduction.
* Ways of weighting:
    - For the normal LSA algorithm that uses dimensionality reduction, the consensus is that “log-entropy weighting” works well. You take the log of each frequency, and multiply the whole term vector by the entropy of the vector. I have found that this also works well for humanistic purposes.
    - For LSA without dimensionality reduction, I would recommend weighting cells by subtracting the expected frequency from the observed frequency. This formula “evens the playing field” between common and uncommon words — and it does so, vitally, in a way that gives a word’s absence from a long document more weight than its absence from a short one. (Not something I care about with plot summaries, because they're all basically the same length.)
    
[Tech note](http://tedunderwood.com/tech-notes/) by Ted Underwood.
* Vector space model works better than simple Pearson’s correlation, because the “cosine similarity” measure used in a vector space model automatically gives more weight to longer documents, and to documents where a term is very strongly represented. (I don't care about document length at the plot-summary stage. Do I care about documents where a term is very strongly represented? Will I want to give longer documents more weight later?)
* INSTEAD OF TF-IDF, because we're not interested in the rarest words but just the words themselves, assess frequency as the difference between the expected occurrence of a term and the actual number of occurrences in the document. -->  this formula: occurrences of X in Y – ((Y length/corpus length) * total occurrences of X in corpus)
* This means that some components of the vector are negative, which is actually important. Otherwise the fact that a word doesn’t occur in a book of 100,000 words would have the same weight as the fact that it doesn’t occur in a play of 15,000 words, because they would both “bottom out” at zero. (Definitely something that matters when I get to full texts.)
* Of course, the “topic trees” produced by this measure are only as good as the lists of words you feed into them. (Wait, at what stage did we feed in a list of words???????)
* It may be controversial whether or not to call this “topic modeling.” If you want to describe the internal structure of a literary work, this technique of course won’t do the job directly, because it doesn’t divide works into parts. But I think it does a pretty good job of identifying the implicit thematic structure of eighteenth-century discourse as a whole, and I wouldn’t be surprised if it turned out that the internal structure of individual works is defined in large part by the way these corpus-level topics weave in and out of them.
* I actually think I... don't want to weight novels by length? Since I don't think length influences the importance of the story to readers...? Udolpho and The Veiled Picture are both just 'a reading experience'? Or does Udolpho have a bigger impact...? I think I need to be very careful about what question I'm asking.

[Document Similarity Based on Concept Tree Distance](http://citeseer.uark.edu/projects/citeseerX/papers/HT2008_short_paper.pdf), by Susan Gauch.
* Concept tree distance is an alternative to vector space models
* Traditional vector space models (i.e. LSA?) turn keyword vectors into concept vectors (i.e. collapse columns??) to reduce semantic ambiguity. However, this ignores the parent-child relationships that the keywords have inside those concept vectors.
* In this study, we introduce a novel technique to construct concept trees representing documents and we apply the tree edit distance algorithm to calculate document similarity.
* Looks like a better way to identify whether documents are related to each other. Not useful if I want to find out what concepts my corpus is mostly about, potentially useful if I want to map a network of their relationships.

[Topic Modeling With the JAVA GUI + Gephi](http://electricarchaeology.ca/2011/11/11/topic-modeling-with-the-java-gui-gephi/) - Prepare your corpus of text, get topics with MALLET, prune the CSV, make a network, visualize it!
* Not actually a tutorial.

[Visualizing Structure in Topic Models](http://www.r-bloggers.com/visualising-structure-in-topic-models/)
* Argues that network maps aren't appropriate, points to a lot of other articles.

[The Digital Humanities Contribution to Topic Modeling](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/dh-contribution-to-topic-modeling/)
* Describes what's gonna be in the journal... looks less focused on specific research case uses than I'd hoped, but still handy.

[Topic Modeling and Digital Humanities](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-and-digital-humanities-by-david-m-blei/) by David M. Blei
* "Formally, a topic is a probability distribution over terms. In each topic, different sets of terms have high probability, and we typically visualize the topics by listing those sets (again, see Figure 1). As I have mentioned, topic models find the sets of terms that tend to occur together in the texts.[2] They look like “topics” because terms that frequently occur together tend to be about the same subject."
* "Traditionally, statistics and machine learning gives a “cookbook” of methods, and users of these tools are required to match their specific problems to general solutions. In probabilistic modeling, we provide a language for expressing assumptions about data and generic methods for computing with those assumptions."
* "In particular, LDA is a type of probabilistic model with hidden variables. Viewed in this context, LDA specifies a generative process, an imaginary probabilistic recipe that produces both the hidden topic structure and the observed words of the texts. ...Given a collection of texts, they reverse the imaginary generative process to answer the question “What is the likely hidden topical structure that generated my observed documents?”"
* "Probabilistic models beyond LDA posit more complicated hidden structures and generative processes of the texts. As examples, we have developed topic models that include syntax, topic hierarchies, document networks, topics drifting through time, readers’ libraries, and the influence of past articles on future articles." --> mom can point me towards a handy suite?
* "Here is the rosy vision. A humanist imagines the kind of hidden structure that she wants to discover and embeds it in a model that generates her archive. The form of the structure is influenced by her theories and knowledge — time and geography, linguistic theory, literary theory, gender, author, politics, culture, history. With the model and the archive in place, she then runs an algorithm to estimate how the imagined hidden structure is realized in actual texts. Finally, she uses those estimates in subsequent study, trying to confirm her theories, forming new theories, and using the discovered structure as a lens for exploration. She discovers that her model falls short in several ways. She revises and repeats." --> What hidden structure am I looking for...?
* *"A model of texts, built with a particular theory in mind, cannot provide evidence for the theory. (After all, the theory is built into the assumptions of the model.) Rather, the hope is that the model helps point us to such evidence."*
* "The goal is for scholars and scientists to creatively design models with an intuitive language of components, and then for computer programs to derive and execute the corresponding inference algorithms with real data. ...Probabilistic models promise to give scholars a powerful language to articulate assumptions about their data and fast algorithms to compute with those assumptions on large archives." --> So if I'm gonna get mom involved I need to start with a specific hypothesis, and model in a way that allows that hypothesis to be tested. I sort of already knew that, but I'll need to really focus on it.

[Topic Modeling and Figurative Language](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-and-figurative-language-by-lisa-m-rhody/) by LISA M. RHODY
* "LDA assumes that documents are like your neighbors’ baskets, and your neighbors are like authors who select from a limited number of available types of words in order to produce documents — in this case poems. Each author chooses to varying degrees how much of each kind of topic they use for each document; however, the number of total available topics, just like the total number of kinds of produce remains constant. While this constraint, the assumption that all the words in a corpus could be derived from a limited set of topics, strikes the human reader as an artificial limitation, it is a necessary constraint in order for LDA to work." --> Rhody chooses a genre of poetry which is assumed to be based on a small set of conventions, well suited to LDA; the Gothic is seen much the same way, also well-suited to LDA?
* **Should I use my Gothic 'canon' as training texts to identify the topics?** Or will this make it impossible to identify when books diverge interestingly from that canon?
* "Topic models (and LDA is one kind of topic modeling algorithm) are generative, unsupervised methods of discovering latent patterns in large collections of natural language text"
* "As Ian H. Witten, Eibe Frank, and Mark A. Hall remind us in Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, the guiding factors for text mining generally and topic modeling specifically are to generate *actionable* and *comprehensible* results (9.5)."
* "methods for measuring the “interpretability of a topic model” (2). The authors present two human evaluation tests meant to discern the accuracy of models by using the keyword distributions ...and the topic to document probabilities ... — called word intrusion and topic intrusion tests respectively" --> referencing [this CS paper](http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~jbg/docs/nips2009-rtl.pdf); not relevant
* "For the purposes of modeling poetry data, word intrusion would not be as effective a method for determining a model’s accuracy at categorizing documents or detecting latent patterns unless the specific changes that happen to the nature of topic distributions for poetic corpora are adjusted for. “Intruders” as individual words does not work for LDA topics of poetry because poems purposefully access and repurpose language in unexpected ways. In other words, topics from the models in my project were not easily interpreted by keywords alone, and yet the results are still useful."
* "My research confirms, to a degree, Ted Underwood’s suspicion that topics in literary studies are better understood as a representation of “discourse” (language as it is used and as it participates in recognized social forms) rather than a thematic string of coherent terms."
* "Topic models of poetry do not reflect the anecdotal evidence that LDA frequently leads to semantically meaningful word distributions. Instead, topic models of the Revising Ekphrasis dataset created four consistently recurring types of topics." --> 1, OCR and other language or dialect distinctive features; 2, Large “chunk” topics (Longer poems pull one or more topics toward language specific to them); 3, Semantically evident topics (but the illusion of thematic comprehensibility obscures what is actually being captured by the topic model; more accurate to say that Topics 32 and 54 participate in discourses surrounding “night” and “natural landscapes”); 4, Semantically opaque topics (her example didn't look opaque to me, but I'll accept the framing of "discourses of elegy" rather than "topic of death")
* Conclusion... isn't about ekphrasis at all. So, not a model I can take for what my own final project should try to look like-- but still a useful read overall, and something it could be useful to quote from.

#### Works To-Read?
http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?p=39600
http://tedunderwood.com/2012/11/11/visualizing-topic-models/
http://sappingattention.blogspot.ca/

**[Journal of Digital Humanities](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/dh-contribution-to-topic-modeling/)

[Getting Started with Mallet and Topic Modeling](http://electricarchaeology.ca/2011/08/30/getting-started-with-mallet-and-topic-modeling/) Links to sequel below

[EXTREMELY specific walkthrough of using mallet](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/topic-modeling-and-mallet)

explain how the extensibility of LDA makes it quite a different kind of beast (relative to LSA): Learning author-topic models from text corpora. M Rosen-Zvi, C Chemudugunta, T Griffiths, P Smyth, M Steyvers, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), ACM, 2010. http://www.datalab.uci.edu/papers/AT_tois.pdf

Closing out my to-read tabs:
http://tedunderwood.com/2011/03/17/a-selection-of-the-language-really-spoken-by-men/
http://tedunderwood.com/category/18c/
http://tedunderwood.com/category/methodology/
http://sappingattention.blogspot.ca/2011/01/clustering-from-search.html
http://www.matthewjockers.net/2011/09/29/the-lda-buffet-is-now-open-or-latent-dirichlet-allocation-for-english-majors/
https://ariddell.org/simple-topic-model.html
http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?p=19113