{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\slmult1

\f0\fs24 \cf0 McCarty also describes models which are not merely partial in some particular set of details, but which \'93deliberately\'94 diverge from their source \'93in order to study the consequences\'94 of the changes. McCarty terms these intentional manipulations \'93distortion,\'94 but Lisa Samuels and Jerome McGann might call them \'93deformance.\'94 I take this term from their essay \'93Deformance and Interpretation,\'94 which seeks to untangle the mechanics of interpretation as a critical act, and the ways in which interpretation distorts artistic works in service of its own performative operations. Whether the final interpreted meaning is \'93resident \'91in\'92 the work, or evoked through \'91reader-response,\'92 or deconstructable\'94 \'97 whichever framework is used for the method of \'93reading along thematic lines\'94 \'97 the method itself, they argue, is neither transparent nor the only option (26). Although \'93criticism\'85 tends to imagine itself as an informative rather than a deformative activity,\'94 both scholarly editions and translations of texts take critical interpretations and write them onto the texts themselves (33). Similarly, \'93heretical and\'85 nonnormative readings of established cultural artifacts\'94 (35), typically undertaken in service of a particular point, constitute deformation. Placing themselves in this tradition, Samuels and McGann apply several deformative interpretive approaches to the poetry of Wallace Stevens. Each deformation is a procedure for rewriting a poem \'97 reordering its lines from last to first, or deleting all the words but the nouns or the verbs \'97 which spurs a new interpretation of the new version of the text. The key advantage of these deformations is a fruitful defamiliarization of the object of study: the procedure \'93reinstalls the text \'97 any text, prose or verse \'97 as a performative event, a made thing\'94 (30) by rendering the mechanics of its creation salient. When readers cannot ignore the critic\'92s act of re-writing, we are implicitly asked to engage again with the author\'92s earlier act of writing. This defamiliarization allows us to \'93imagine things about the text that we did not and perhaps could not otherwise know\'94 (36), because we have been re-sensitized to new details of the work.}