{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\qj

\f0\fs24 \cf0 It is through this new sensitivity that Samuels and McGann begin to echo McCarty. The two essays at first seem to be concerned with very different approaches, but they converge by way of Leah Price. In 
\i The Anthology and the Rise of the Novel
\i0 , Price draws attention to the ways in which all reading, and particularly all scholarly writing, must involve a constant re-editing of texts, influenced by memory and argument. In keeping with Samuels and McGann\'92s classification of \'93[e]laborate scholarly editions\'94 (33) as deformative criticism, Price argues that any edited text \'97 \'91elaborate\'92 or not \'97 produces, not a flawed or distorted copy of the original, but a new text. The process of editing a text must always reveal the editor\'92s \'93unspoken assumptions about the most efficient way to convey information, and indeed what counts as information at all\'94 (13), and thus gives us a new thing to examine. As Price observes, when scholars examine texts\'97 when we take notes on them, extract quotes for close reading, summarize or categorize scenes, chapters, or books\'97 our act of reading is also one of editing. McCarty allows us to recognize that this mental editing is not a sign of scholarly weakness, but a model, made necessary by the limits of human memory. Price\'92s project is more interested in the literal anthologizing undertaken by publishers than in the mental anthologizing implicit in the scholarly act of thinking about several books at once; her ultimate argument is about the works of George Eliot, not about the methodology of literary criticism. Nonetheless, her observations, once anthologized in abridged form alongside digital humanities thinkers, allows us to \'91bare the devices\'92 of literary criticism itself.\
}