{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf810
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\qj

\f0\fs24 \cf0 My own modeling framework is informed by all of these. My key ideas are sensitivity in data selection, and procedurality in visual representation. My two \'91texts\'92 \'96 Tracy\'92s and Frank\'92s bibliographies \'96 are themselves two very different deformative models of \'91The Gothic Novel,\'92 and each render different distinctions more or less salient. When forming my research questions, I begin by asking what a given source of information allows me to be sensitive to. Tracy\'92s motifs emphasize events and singular images, with each detail systematically tallied. In contrast, Frank\'92s Gothic types emphasize a work\'92s overall tone, and his evaluations are at times maddeningly qualitative and subtle. The two are thus able to usefully complement each other. As I work with these texts, I dwell upon procedure as a way to meditate upon the implications of earlier critics\'92 frameworks. Because I must iterate all of my decisions at least 178 times when I decide to include a new axis of distinction in my spreadsheet, much of my \'91research\'92 has been developing procedures that work 
\i with
\i0  each model, deforming books into spreadsheets and then into images in ways that will render their implicit models explicit and obvious. Rather than visualizing data, then, my goal has been to render models legible. My graphs thus amplify Tracy\'92s and Frank\'92s choices, allowing me to see whether their distinctions are fruitful, and whether their results accord with our expectations.\
}