{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf810
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 And indeed, an identifiable gendered school does emerge at a glance: 29 distinctly male-authored motifs indicate male dominance of largely the things we would expect men to dominate. These motifs suggest that the darkest side of the Gothic was primarily the province of men: death may be slightly female-dominated, but murder is male-dominated, as are blood, corpses, and bones. These motifs suggest that men are more likely not to simply mention death as a plot device or an inevitability, but rather to dwell vividly upon its effects. Similarly, human sacrifice, putrefaction, starvation, and torture all involve directly depicting that which other novels might merely imply. The masculine impulse to 'go farther,' to replace coy allusions with unflinching enactments, is most evident in my sample novels' treatment of incest. General themes of incest are widespread, appearing in 51 of the 208 novels under consideration-- nearly a quarter of the works. However, in 45 of those novels, there are no cases of what Tracy terms "actual" incest, only "incest, literary flirtation with (including false alarms, foiled attempts, threats, and unconsummated incestuous passion)." This kind of narrative discretion is employed roughly equally by both male and female authors, and makes up the vast majority of all depictions of incest. However, six cases of actual, no-narrative-flinching incest are documented-- and all six are by men. To force one's readers to look directly at the horrors depicted, rather than allowing them to become terrified by their own imaginations, is, of course, the technique of the horror-Gothic, as contrasted with the terror-Gothic. Identifying the horror-Gothic as a predominantly male affair comes as no surprise, and accords nicely with the critical tradition of identifying Lewis as the quintessential horror-Gothic writer.}