{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 In order to better define that Gothic mainstream, I turned to a second bibliography, which classified novels by their \'91Gothic type\'92; here, too, the unbalanced nature of our attempted binary becomes obvious. Frank\'92s \'93types\'94 are, like Tracy\'92s \'93motifs,\'94 clearly intended for a different sort of scholarly use than my own quantification: for the 178 texts indexed by both authors, Frank provides 131 unique classifications. Many of these are \'93unique\'94 primarily from the point of view of a spreadsheet: \'93Domestic fiction (various Gothic elements)\'94 and \'93Domestic fiction (intermittent Gothic elements),\'94 for example, are distinguished only by a slight gradation of degree. [Whereas Tracy treated her motifs as independent and stable, Frank is not interested in the Gothic types themselves.] [Similarly, his \'93Critical Synopsis\'94 of each text is not interested in recapitulating the details of the novels\'92 events. Instead, each synopsis describes the origins of any literary borrowings, briefly discusses the plot in terms of its structural tropes, and places the work\'92s attitude into a broader context.]\
The two bibliographies\'92 treatments of Grenville Fletcher\'92s 
\i Rosalviva, Or, The Demon Dwarf
\i0 , for example, serves as a useful illustration of their differences. Tracy\'92s summary is a litany of events: it begins matter-of-factly with the sentence \'93Leontini loves Viola di Morini, but she marries someone else,\'94 and is equally unfazed when the titular dwarf arrives in the third act and when the dwarven appearence turns out to be false (51). Frank, in contrast, spends more than half his words on context, as his own first sentence [suggests]:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1432\fi-4\ri0\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \'93From Rumplestilskin in the fairytale to the comic evil of Dickens\'92s Daniel Quilp in The Old Curiosity Shop (1841), the figure of the dwarf was often called upon to perform such demonic services as vengeance, prophecy, child possession, and transformation.\'94 (107)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 To this broad literary history he adds Mary Shelley\'92s story \'93Transformation\'94 as potential precursor for the disguise in Fletcher\'92s novel, and includes several assessments of the Gothic\'92s particular embellishments of \'93the dwarf as a resolver of dilemmas of identity\'94 (107) and \'93dwarfs\'85 spin[ning] webs of murderous intrigue for diabolic ladies\'94 (108). All of these details stand in stark contrast to Tracy\'92s list of seven novels under the index entry \'93dwarf,\'94 which treats the sinister disguise in 
\i Rosalviva
\i0  as interchangeable with depictions of non-supernatural and even non-evil little people. Unlike Tracy, then, Frank is interested not simply in what happens, but in 
\i how
\i0  it happens. [His object of study is the text, and the connections between it and its most closely related texts.] His Gothic type for Sophia Lee\'92s 
\i The Recess
\i0 , for example, describes the novels as \'93Gothified history (terror and sentimental elements)\'94 (204), tying it simultaneously to the \'93Gothified history\'94 of William Godwin\'92s 
\i St. Leon
\i0 , the \'93terror mode\'94 of Radcliffe\'92s novels, and the \'93sentimental Gothic\'94 of Charlotte Dacre\'92s 
\i The Libertine
\i0  and 
\i The Passions.
\i0  These threads cannot be traced systematically \'97 no helpful index like Tracy\'92s attempts to collect them. Instead, [his Gothic types model the Gothic as [a web of connections].] }