{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf810
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 To be precise about the nature of this connection, I [made several pivot tables] along the same principles of [predictive utility] that structured my examination of Tracy\'92s motifs. Approaching from one direction, 50% of Radcliffean novels are also high gothic. If you know a book is Radcliffean, you know it is probably high Gothic, terror mode, and sentimental, in that order. Approaching from the other direction, 25% of sentimental novels are also Radcliffean. Gothic types which are likely to include Radcliffean novels are sentimental, naturalized or explained, and high Gothic, in that order. This particular [picture of the Female Gothic] may explain the comparison of 
\i Udolpho
\i0  to Inchbald\'92s
\i  A Simple Story
\i0  which so puzzled Clara McIntyre. In response to a review which declated Udolpho to be \'93the best composition of this kind since Mrs. Inchbald\'92s
\i  Simple Story,
\i0 \'94 McIntyre is taken aback by the expression \'93this kind\'94 (94). She says, \'93The reviewer must surely be thinking of fiction in general, for, except that they are both fiction, two compositions could hardly be more unlike than 
\i The Mysteries of Udolpho
\i0  and 
\i A Simple Story
\i0 \'94 (94). McIntyre begins to draw a connection based on \'93the ethical purpose of the book,\'94 which in Inchbald is \'93rather too obvious for successful art,\'94 but decides that although Radcliffe\'92s writing \'93it is true, was strictly moral,\'94 Radcliffe\'92s \'93main interest\'94 does not lie in moralizing, and 
\i Udolpho
\i0 \'92s project is along a different line. However, [McIntyre overlooks the importance of moral sentiment.]}