{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf810
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi340\sl336\slmult1\pardirnatural\qj

\f0\fs24 \cf0 To force one's readers to look directly at the horrors depicted, rather than allowing them to become terrified by their own imaginations, is, of course, the technique of the horror-Gothic, as contrasted with the terror-Gothic. Identifying the horror-Gothic as a predominantly male affair comes as no surprise, and accords nicely with the critical tradition of identifying Lewis as the quintessential horror-Gothic writer.\
However, it does not follow that the terror-Gothic must therefore be the province of women. Ann Radcliffe may have founded the terror-Gothic school, but women and men appear to have followed in her footsteps equally. Moreover, the existence of two opposing schools does not prove the equal footing of those schools; setting aside questions of gender to look at the relative prominence of various motifs, readers are vastly more likely to encounter the temporary terrors of abduction and confinement than the more permanent horrors of bones and corpses. Even death, which could reasonably appear in either school of novel despite its horrifying potential, is unexpectedly scarce compared to the widespread fainting.\
In the wider context of the Gothic, then, it seems that the terror-Gothic and the Female Gothic are, in fact, simply the Gothic-- with the male horror-Gothic as the outlier subgenre in which an author's writing has been shaped by his gender.\
These results remain preliminary, at least until a sample can be assembled which involves more texts at fewer levels of mediation. However, they serve as a useful reminder that not all contrasts are necessarily perfect binaries. Research at a large scale provides a unique opportunity to compare the critical perception of a body of work to contemporary readers' experience of that same body; here, it has focused only on one specific way of seeking gendered imagery, but future projects can easily expand to investigate plot structure or chronology, and in a few years perhaps even style. And in the mean time, those scholars of the Gothic who study deeply only a few texts at a time can discuss their observations regarding potential expressions of a male viewpoint without needing to seek its exact analogue among female writers.}