{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 To take the first clumsy steps toward that large-scale examination, I have deployed data visualizations of metadata regarding 208 early Gothic texts. My data derives from Ann Tracy\'92s bibliography 
\i The Gothic Novel 1790-1830: Plot Summaries and Index to Motifs
\i0 ; my experimental method is informed by Lisa Samuels and Jerome McGann\'92s \'93Deformance and Interpretation\'94 and by Willard McCarty\'92s \'93Knowing: Modeling in Literary Studies.\'94The sonnet is, perhaps, the form least likely to leap to mind when one sits down to discuss the poetry of the Harlem Renaissance. Even if one resists the urge to view the entire era through the lens of modernism, the next most obvious site of artistic experimentation is the use of dialect in poetry, and other attempts to capture the authentic voice of Harlem life. In contrast, the sonnet, as Amitai Avi-Ram has noted, is often read as conventional and inherently conservative (32). However, if we form our picture of the poetry of the Harlem Renaissance not based on the subsequent popularity of individual works or authors, but by examining the anthologies which explicity sought to define \'91Negro verse\'92 during the height of the movement itself, the sonnet appears not just as a recurring tradition but a site of innovation. On the rare occassion that a scholar considers a Harlem Renaissance sonnet at length, discussion of its form often begins and ends with the choice of the sonnet itself. And indeed, innovation within a fixed form is subtle and limited, easily overshadowed by more dramatic poetic inventions. Nonetheless, it is by no means impossible, and close examination of the wide range of sonnets circulating at this period reveals innovations at three sites of increasing subtlety: subject matter, sestet rhyme schemes, and manipulation of the volta. The varying experimentation by different poets serves different aesthetic and political goals, but as a whole, the Harlem Renaissance sonnet, despite its archaic European form, creates a small self-sufficient canon.}