{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\fi700\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 I began with the ten-page \'91Index to Motifs\'92 included at the end of Ann Tracy\'92s bibliography. Tracy uses the term \'93motif\'94 broadly to encompass a wide range of plot elements, images, and character types. This index is clearly built for a different kind of scholarly use than that which I have made of it; its intended audience is \'93scholars with particular interests\'94 (195), such as \'93garden as a scene of temptation\'94 (200), who wish to locate new books to close-read. Accordingly, Tracy has prioritized presenting a wide range of distinctive individual motifs, such as \'93hand, cold, seizing heroine\'94 (200), rather than broad categories. Indeed, her preface to the index indicates that highly popular motifs were intentionally excluded: \'93the abundance of murders,\'94 she says, \'93argued for the retention\'85 of specialized murders only\'94 (195), and castles have similarly been ignored. Tracy\'92s omissions work at cross-purposes to my own approach \'97 despite Tracy\'92s assertion that castles \'93are so pervasive a device that no purpose can be served by the recitation of two hundred novels that have them\'94 (195), I would have liked to compare them to manor houses, cottages, abbeys, and convents \'97 and I have had to discard much of her work. 138 of her motifs have been disregarded entirely, because they appear in fewer than twenty novels. Additionally, most of the motifs which she breaks down into detailed sub-categories have been reduced back to their stem category. \'93Poison,\'94 for example, is indexed with categories for \'93blade,\'94 \'93chaplet,\'94 \'93kiss,\'94 \'93letter,\'94 \'93orange,\'94 \'93plant on grave,\'94 and \'93sacrificial wine\'94 (203), but I have elided these nuances in favor of a broader category of \'93poison (any).\'94}