{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Baker, Ernest A. 
\i The History of the English Novel: Volume V, The Novel of Sentiment and the Gothic Romance
\i0 . 1929. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1950. Print.\
Fleenor, Juliann E., ed. 
\i The Female Gothic
\i0 . Montreal and London: Eden Press, 1983. Print.\
Frank, Frederick S.\'a0
\i The First Gothics: A Critical Guide to the English Gothic Novel
\i0 . New York: Garland, 1987. Print.\
Frow, John. 
\i Genre
\i0 . London and New York: Routledge, 2006. Print.\
Jones, Stephanie. 
\i Exploring Gothic Fiction: A Corpus-Based Analysis
\i0 . Thesis, University of Edinburgh. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Research Archive, 2010. Web. 7 June 2014.\
McCarty, Willard. \'93Knowing: Modeling in Literary Studies.\'94 
\i A Companion to Digital Literary Studies
\i0 , ed. Susan Schreibman and Ray Siemens. Oxford: Blackwell, 2008. Web. 27 Jan. 2014.\
McIntyre, Clara. 
\i Ann Radcliffe in Relation to Her Time
\i0 . New Haven: Yale UP, 1920. Photocopy. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms, 1967. Print.\
Price, Leah. 
\i The Anthology and the Rise of the Novel: From Richardson to George Eliot
\i0 . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2000. Print.\
Samuels, Lisa and Jerome McGann. \'93Deformance and Interpretation.\'94 
\i Poetry & Politics
\i0 . Spec. issue of 
\i New Literary History
\i0  30.1 (Winter 1999): 25-56. 
\i JSTOR
\i0 . Web. 24 Feb 2014.\
Tompkins, J.M.S. 
\i The popular novel in England, 1770-1800
\i0 . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1961. Print.\
Tracy, Ann Blaisdell.\'a0
\i The Gothic Novel, 1790-1830: Plot Summaries and Index to Motifs
\i0 . Lexington: Kentucky UP, 1981. Print.\
Wallace, Diana and Andrew Smith, eds. 
\i Female Gothic: New Directions
\i0 . Basingstroke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. Print.}