{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 PalatinoLinotype-Roman;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Price draws attention to the ways in which all reading, and particularly all scholarly writing, must involve a constant re-editing of texts, influenced by memory and argument.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi540\sl480\slmult1\qj

\f1 \cf0 Just as her rational explanations allowed Radcliffe to incorporate empowering myths unapologetically into modern literature, so too do her \'93embellishments\'94 allow her to demonstrate her literary seriousness. Price herself notes that the prevalence in the novel of material that ought not be skipped, particularly her original poetry, \'93differentiates Radcliffe,\'94 in reviewers\'92 minds, \'93from mere entertainers\'94 (97). But Radcliffe doesn\'92t simply write and quote poetry: she also fills her text with landscapes and architecture, drawing on the literary traditions of travel narratives; with moral contemplations that wouldn\'92t be out of place in popular sentimental novels; with dramatic structures and staging that owe an obvious debt to the theatre; and, of course, with all the traditions of romance. Even the frustrating digressions of her comic servants come straight from Shakespeare. Walpole had, much earlier, \'93designedly\'94 introduced bumbling servants based on the model of a \'93higher authority,\'94 namely, \'93the great master of nature, SHAKESPEARE\'94 (22). Indeed, Walpole provides a direct description of the Gothic-as-new-Classic framework, comparing Shakespeare to \'93the Grecian sculptor, who, to convey the idea of a Colossus\'85 inserted a little boy measuring his thumb\'94 (22). But whereas Walpole must explain and justify his lineage, Radcliffe allows it to go without saying. Walpole\'92s preface points to specific characters, and scenes, but Radcliffe attributes her epigraphs, whichever play they are drawn from or character they are spoken by, to, simply, \'93Shakespeare.\'94 In the strength of her unifying vision, Radcliffe is like the Romantic poet, discussed by Tilar Mazzeo; she subordinates all her literary borrowings to a singular goal, \'91mastering\'92 them with her individual genius, and thus transforms them. 
\i Udolpho
\i0 \'92s
\i  
\i0 \'93beauties\'94 go beyond embellishment to create a deeply intertextual novel, which is built upon diverse foundations but stands upon its own authority.\
}