{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c0;\csgenericrgb\c100000\c99997\c99999;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Frank\'92s Gothic mainstream [is largely non-gendered]. The two most prevalent tags [in the corpus as a whole, representing all Gothic without attention paid to authorial gender] are \'93Gothic\'94 (83% of all works) and \'93pure/high\'94 (39%), both of which have the same gendered distribution of the sample as a whole. Our only hint of a gendered trend is the third most prevalent tag, \'93terror\'94 (34% of works), which, at 50% female, is just above the female baseline. [This is not exciting.] The next two tags in prominence are not informative about genre variation, but instead highlight the [multiplicity?] of Frank\'92s [assessments]: the tags \'93mode\'94 and \'93elements\'94 are each applied to 27% of all works in the sample. These terms generally appear as qualifiers for his other assessments, as in \'93terror mode\'94 or \'93sentimental elements,\'94 and accordingly remind us to modify the implied force of \'93terror\'94 and \'93sentimental\'94 as tags. Indeed, many of Frank\'92s tags are essentially qualifiers: [(mode, effects, Gothified, imitation).] In Frank\'92s Gothic typology, then, the Gothic is not monolithic: [works use elements of things, but things mostly come from other places/ are interconnected] Nothing for Frank is just one genre. Horror and terror, for example, are far from mutually exclusive. Of the 53 \'93horror\'94 works, \cf2 \cb1 26\cf2 \cb3  (\cf2 \cb1 49\cf2 \cb3 %) are also tagged \'93terror\'94. These \cf2 \cb1 26\cf2 \cb3  are \cf2 \cb1 50\cf2 \cb3 % by men, making the horror-terror mode more predictive of male authorship than horror alone. Of the remaining \cf2 \cb1 27 works which are purely horror, no terror, there are 9 by women, 9\cf2 \cb3  by men, and \cf2 \cb1 9\cf2 \cb3  unknown \'97 a far cry from the horror Gothic as the exclusive province of men. [This is the reverse of Tracy \'97 Tracy showed a male horror and equal-opportunity terror mainstream; Frank shows equal-opportunity horror, and female terror] Between the two, the only part that\'92s consistent is that terror vastly outnumbers horror. [There are gendered currents, but none of them are striking enough to start making predictions about the many unsigned works.]}