{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf810
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This particular picture of the Female Gothic, equally as tied to the sentimental novel as to the high Gothic, may explain the comparison of 
\f1\i Udolpho 
\f0\i0 to Inchbald\'92s 
\f1\i A Simple Story 
\f0\i0 which so puzzled Clara McIntyre in 
\f1\i Ann Radcliffe in Relation to Her Time
\f0\i0 . In response to a review which declared 
\f1\i Udolpho 
\f0\i0 to be \'93the best composition of this kind since Mrs. Inchbald\'92s 
\f1\i Simple Story,
\f0\i0 \'94 McIntyre is taken aback by the expression \'93of this kind\'94 (94). She says, \'93The reviewer must surely be thinking of fiction in general, for, except that they are both fiction, two compositions could hardly be more unlike than 
\f1\i The Mysteries of Udolpho 
\f0\i0 and 
\f1\i A Simple Story
\f0\i0 \'94 (94). McIntyre begins to draw a connection based on \'93the ethical purpose of the book,\'94 which in Inchbald is \'93rather too obvious for successful art,\'94 but decides that although Radcliffe\'92s writing \'93it is true, was strictly moral,\'94 Radcliffe\'92s \'93main interest\'94 does not lie in moralizing, and 
\f1\i Udolpho
\f0\i0 \'92s project is along a different line. McIntyre has thus identified what I argue is the key connection between the two works, but she overlooks its importance: moral sentiment, and its connection to the emotional experience of the reader, was the throughline which connected the Gothic deeply to its non-Gothic literary context, and to the broader intellectual debates of the end of the Enlightenment. 
\f1\fs24 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\sa240\partightenfactor0

\i\fs34\fsmilli17333 \cf2 The Sentimental Novel 
\i0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 My results here suggest a call back to an older school of criticism, which saw French sentimental novels\'97 rather than German horror stories\'97 as the forbears of the Gothic. Ernest Baker, for example, argues that \'93[t]he sources of Gothic romance... are to be sought in the popular variant of the fiction of sensibility evolved by the Abb\'e9 Pr\'e9vost and elaborated later on by Baculard d\'92Arnaud. The exciting adventures, the violent emotions, the gloomy scenes, forests, and antres, castles, dungeons, and graveyards, in the abb\'e9\'92s novels and the plays and stories of Baculard, were to be the distinctive features of Gothic romance throughout its course. It was all a derivative of the cult of emotion\'94 (175). In this history of the genre, German influences are superficial set-dressing rather than inherent to the genre: \'93Some novelists sought only to conjure up a witching atmosphere of awe and vague apprehension; others employed the most violent shocks of physical anguish and fear. They all dabbled in the supernatural, either playing upon or playing with feelings of superstition; and, later on, those who had become acquainted with German folk-lore and its ghosts and elves and goblins found their account in satiating the greediest appetites for crime, diabolism, and nameless horrors\'94 (Baker 176). Even the supernatural is relevant primarily because it allows authors to manipulate readers\'92 \'93feelings of superstition\'94 in service of varying gradations of fear. What Baker is sensitive to is not the features of the Gothic which now draw attention\'97 he does not make his distinctions based on politics or aesthetics or gender\'97 instead, he defines the Gothic by its emotional manipulations. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 Emotional response is salient as a distinguishing factor because Baker, like many of his contemporaries, writes from the teleological assumption that the history of the novel must be the history of the 
\f1\i realist 
\f0\i0 novel. Baker\'92s approach to the Gothic is not so obviously mediated as Tracy\'92s or Frank\'92s; as we would expect, Baker makes no explicitly deformative moves, but proceeds by discussing to the texts themselves in their entirety. However, as Leah Price 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 Lawrence Evalyn 21 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 observes, it is impossible for human memory to hold an entire novel at once, let alone the whole history of the novel. Baker, like any scholar, must mentally abridge the novels as he writes about them, and his abridgements take for granted the idea that the \'91goal\'92 of the novel itself is to become realist. Because Baker\'92s criticism does not \'93[bare] its devices\'94 (Samuels and McGann 49), his assumptions remain implicit in the moralizing judgments throughout his work. Baker\'92s excoriation of \'93that amoral person [Laurence] Sterne\'94 for being a \'93debauched sentimentalist\'94 who \'93fondled his sensibility,\'94 \'93aware of his vice, and voluptuously enjoying all its sweetness\'94 (95), for example, evaluates 
\f1\i Tristram Shandy 
\f0\i0 along markedly different lines than would now be considered fruitful; his research into the particular connections between works and schools of writing is not easily divorced from its foundations. J.M.S. Tompkins, too, dismisses the Gothic on the basis of these kinds of assumptions: with the rise of the Gothic, she says, \'93the average novelist paid, on the whole, very little attention to the probable, and the novel in consequence slipped farther away from reality, as though a window on to the other world had been changed to a magic lantern" (57). Both critics model the novel itself as a training-ground for the mind, through which habits of thought are established, and which therefore ought to inculcate the \'91right\'92 mode of thought. Accordingly, both model the Gothic as a dangerously emotional and disordered mode of thought, notable not for its plots or sets or even the kinds of emotions induced, but for the overpowering nature of the reading experience. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 In this model, the Gothic is defined as a spectrum of sentiment, sensation, and sensibility \'97 all of which, Baker argues, are distinguished from each other only by \'93intensification\'94, and not in terms of fundamental type (120). Tompkins, too, argues that \'91fantastic\'92 plot elements did not render the Gothic a fundamentally different sort of story than those which preceded it: in the Gothic, she argues, "the accepted themes were repeated in a shallower tone and overlaid with all 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 Lawrence Evalyn 22 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 the romantic incidents of disguise, abduction, lost heirs and mistaken identity, which had been for hundreds of years the story-teller's stock in trade\'94 (57), rendering these stories functionally the same as what she terms the sensational novel. We can reject their realist teleology without rejecting this sensitivity to emotional response. Doing so allows us to better place the Gothic in context with other eighteenth century works, such that the Gothic participates directly in Enlightenment conversations about human nature and rationality. It also allows us to see the \'91school of Radcliffe\'92 in a new light, returning to Clara McIntyre\'92s assessment that \'93[Radcliffe\'92s] most important contribution is a matter not of theme, but of structure\'94 (77), in her development of suspense. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 My method has been, in its assumptions, necessarily historicist \'97 sensitive not to retroactive critical distinctions, but attempting to describe a body of works as it relates to itself. I have chosen not to ask what qualities will cause a novel to be categorized by my bibliographers as \'91Gothic,\'92 but rather what constitutes \'91normal\'92 within this pool. In doing so, I have found evidence at various points of both a Male Gothic and a Female Gothic that are in keeping with some critical conceptions. However, I remain persuaded that the most striking result is the large body of works that fall into neither category, and the unbalanced or awkwardly non-parallel nature of any binary distinctions one might wish to draw. McCarty argues that \'93a good model can be fruitful in two ways: either by fulfilling our expectations, and so strengthening its theoretical basis, or by violating them, and so bringing that basis into question\'94 \'97 of these, he says, \'93failure to give us what we expect is by far the more important result\'94 (McCarty). Accordingly, my failure to find a an obvious or stable gender divide within the Gothic is valuable as evidence that in the broadest context of the Gothic, the conversation occurring between novels is not driven by authorial gender.
\f1\fs24 \
}